Add Trino 408 release notes (#16209)
trinodb/trino: docs/src/main/sphinx/release/release-408.md

# Release 408 (22 Feb 2023)

## General

* Fix query failure when performing a remote partitioning exchange on a
  [structural type](structural-data-types) that contains `NULL` elements. ({issue}`16140`)

## CLI

* Add `AUTO` output format which switches from `ALIGNED` to `VERTICAL` if
  the output doesn't fit the current terminal. ({issue}`12208`)

> ## BigQuery connector

Reviewer: An empty line is missing.

> * Add support for writing BigQuery `numeric` and `bignumeric` types. ({issue}`16145`)

Reviewer 2: We prefer to talk about SQL support in terms of Trino types, so this should instead say - add support for writing `DECIMAL` types to BigQuery.

That is more important here because while we can INSERT into BIGNUMERIC columns in BigQuery a Trino user doesn't get to choose NUMERIC vs BIGQUERY. Everything written/created via Trino would be NUMERIC in BigQuery.

## Delta Lake connector

> * Add support for creating tables with the `change_data_feed_enabled` table

Reviewer: Trino table property. 

@colebow Pease fix your change.

  concurrent modifications. ({issue}`13199`)
* Fix inaccurate change data feed entries for `MERGE` queries. ({issue}`16127`)
* Fix performance regression for writing to partitioned tables when table
  statistics are absent. ({issue}`16152`)

## Hive connector

* Retry dropping Delta tables registered on AWS Glue to avoid failures due to
  concurrent modifications. ({issue}`13199`)
* Remove support for the deprecated `hive-hadoop2` connector name. ({issue}`16166`)
* Fix performance regression for writing to partitioned tables when table
  statistics are absent. ({issue}`16152`)

## Hudi connector

* Fix performance regression for writing to partitioned tables when table
  statistics are absent. ({issue}`16152`)

## Iceberg connector

* Reduce memory usage when reading `$files` system tables. ({issue}`15991`)
* Require the `iceberg.jdbc-catalog.driver-class` configuration property to be
  set to prevent a "driver not found" error after initialization. ({issue}`16196`)
* Fix performance regression for writing to partitioned tables when table
  statistics are absent. ({issue}`16152`)

## SingleStore connector

> * Remove support for the deprecated `memsql` connector name. ({issue}`16180`)

Reviewer 2: It's good practice to include instructions for users with release notes which require some action from users. Something like change `connector.name` to `singlestore` from `memsql`.

## SQL Server connector

> * Add support for predicate pushdown on case-sensitive `varchar` and
>   `nvarchar` columns with the `IN`, `NOT IN`, `==`, and `<>` operators. ({issue}`15714`)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Add support for pushing down `IN`, `NOT IN`, `=` and `!=` predicates on text columns which use a case-sensitive collation in SQL Server. ({issue}`15714`)
```

(There's no `==`, also it's not limited to varchar and nvarchar, it applies to any text types)

# Release 408 (22 Feb 2023)

## General

* Fix query failure when performing a remote partitioning exchange on a
  [structural type](structural-data-types) that contains `NULL` elements. ({issue}`16140`)

## CLI

* Add `AUTO` output format which switches from `ALIGNED` to `VERTICAL` if
  the output doesn't fit the current terminal. ({issue}`12208`)

## BigQuery connector

* Add support for writing `DECIMAL` types to BigQuery. ({issue}`16145`)

## Delta Lake connector

* Add support for creating tables with the `change_data_feed_enabled` table
  property. ({issue}`16129`)
* Improve query performance on tables that Trino has written to with `INSERT`. ({issue}`16026`)
* Retry dropping Delta tables registered on AWS Glue to avoid failures due to
  concurrent modifications. ({issue}`13199`)
* Fix inaccurate change data feed entries for `MERGE` queries. ({issue}`16127`)
* Fix performance regression for writing to partitioned tables when table
  statistics are absent. ({issue}`16152`)

## Hive connector

> * Retry dropping Delta tables registered on AWS Glue to avoid failures due to

Reviewer 3: Does this belong into the Delta Lake connector section instead .. or in addition?

Author: In addition - it was listed as Hive & Delta cc @ebyhr

  concurrent modifications. ({issue}`13199`)

> * Remove support for the deprecated `hive-hadoop2` connector name. ({issue}`16166`)

Reviewer 3: Should we move this up to be the first item since its kinda a breaking change @martint ?

Reviewer 4: Yes, that's reasonable. We may want to mention what's the expected name to use instead.

* Fix performance regression for writing to partitioned tables when table
  statistics are absent. ({issue}`16152`)

## Hudi connector

* Fix performance regression for writing to partitioned tables when table
  statistics are absent. ({issue}`16152`)

## Iceberg connector

* Reduce memory usage when reading `$files` system tables. ({issue}`15991`)

> * Require the `iceberg.jdbc-catalog.driver-class` configuration property to be

Reviewer 3: Is this documented on how to set that and what is even supported in terms of different JDBC drivers (and therefore databases) ?

Author: It's documented that it's mandatory and there's an example that sets it, but we don't have further details.

  set to prevent a "driver not found" error after initialization. ({issue}`16196`)
* Fix performance regression for writing to partitioned tables when table
  statistics are absent. ({issue}`16152`)

## SingleStore connector

* Remove support for the deprecated `memsql` connector name, requiring the

>   `connector.name` property to be changed to `singlestore`. ({issue}`16180`)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  `connector.name` property set to `singlestore`. ({issue}`16180`)
```

## SQL Server connector

> * Add support for predicate pushdown on case-sensitive text columns with the

Reviewer 3: Is this added to the docs?

Author: Nope

# Release 408 (22 Feb 2023)

## General

> * Fix query failure when performing a remote partitioning exchange on a

Reviewer 4: "remote partitioning exchange" is not something normal users see or understand. Rephrase in terms of the kinds of queries that have this problem.

  [structural type](structural-data-types) that contains `NULL` elements. ({issue}`16140`)

## Security

> * Deprecate the `http-server.authentication.oauth2.groups-field` configuration 

Reviewer 4: What's the functionality that's being deprecated? The entry should talk about that, instead.

  property by renaming it to
  `deprecated.http-server.authentication.oauth2.groups-field`. ({issue}`15669`)

## CLI

* Add `AUTO` output format which switches from `ALIGNED` to `VERTICAL` if
  the output doesn't fit the current terminal. ({issue}`12208`)

## BigQuery connector

> * Add support for writing `DECIMAL` types to BigQuery. ({issue}`16145`)

Reviewer 4: `decimal`

## Delta Lake connector

* Add support for creating tables with the Delta Lake `change_data_feed_enabled`
  table property. ({issue}`16129`)
* Improve query performance on tables that Trino has written to with `INSERT`. ({issue}`16026`)
* Improve performance of reading [structural types](structural-data-types) from
  Parquet files. This optimization can be disabled with the
  `parquet_optimized_nested_reader_enabled` catalog session property or the
  `parquet.optimized-nested-reader.enabled` catalog configuration property. ({issue}`16177`)
* Retry dropping Delta tables registered in the Glue catalog to avoid failures
  due to concurrent modifications. ({issue}`13199`)
* Fix inaccurate change data feed entries for `MERGE` queries. ({issue}`16127`)

> * Fix performance regression for writing to partitioned tables when table

Reviewer 4: This sentence sounds weird. Maybe:

> Fix performance regression when writing to partitioned tables if table statistics are absent.

  statistics are absent. ({issue}`16152`)

## Hive connector

* Retry dropping Delta tables registered in the Glue catalog to avoid failures
  due to concurrent modifications. ({issue}`13199`)
* Remove support for the deprecated `hive-hadoop2` connector name. ({issue}`16166`)
* Fix performance regression for writing to partitioned tables when table
  statistics are absent. ({issue}`16152`)

## Hudi connector

* Fix performance regression for writing to partitioned tables when table
  statistics are absent. ({issue}`16152`)

## Iceberg connector

* Reduce memory usage when reading `$files` system tables. ({issue}`15991`)
* Require the `iceberg.jdbc-catalog.driver-class` configuration property to be
  set to prevent a "driver not found" error after initialization. ({issue}`16196`)
* Fix performance regression for writing to partitioned tables when table
  statistics are absent. ({issue}`16152`)

## Ignite connector

* Add [Ignite connector](/connector/ignite). ({issue}`8098`)

## SingleStore connector

* Remove support for the deprecated `memsql` connector name, requiring the
  `connector.name` property to set to `singlestore`. ({issue}`16180`)

## SQL Server connector

> * Add support for pushing down `=`, `!=` and `IN` predicates over case-sensitive 

Reviewer 4: `<>` instead of `!=`. While Trino supports `!=` for convenience, the "official" operator is `<>`

Author: I had it as that, then Ashhar put it as `!=` in the issue. 😢

* Improve performance of reading [structural types](structural-data-types) from
  Parquet files. This optimization can be disabled with the
  `parquet_optimized_nested_reader_enabled` catalog session property or the
  `parquet.optimized-nested-reader.enabled` catalog configuration property. ({issue}`16177`)
* Retry dropping Delta tables registered in the Glue catalog to avoid failures
  due to concurrent modifications. ({issue}`13199`)
* Fix inaccurate change data feed entries for `MERGE` queries. ({issue}`16127`)
* Fix performance regression when writing to partitioned tables if table
  statistics are absent. ({issue}`16152`)

## Hive connector

* Remove support for the deprecated `hive-hadoop2` connector name, requiring the
  `connector.name` property to be set to `hive`. ({issue}`16166`)
* Retry dropping Delta tables registered in the Glue catalog to avoid failures
  due to concurrent modifications. ({issue}`13199`)
* Fix performance regression when writing to partitioned tables if table
  statistics are absent. ({issue}`16152`)

## Hudi connector

* Fix performance regression when writing to partitioned tables if table

>   statistics are absent. ({issue}`16152`)

Reviewer: I believe Hudi connector doesn't support writing operations. Remove.
